Explainer document (#14)
effect-handlers/wasm-spec: proposals/continuations/Explainer.md

# Typed Continuations

This document provides an informal presentation of the *typed
continuations* proposal, a minimal and compatible extension to Wasm
for structured non-local control flow. The proposal is minimal in the

> sense that it leverages the existing instruction set and type

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sense that it leverages Wasm's existing instruction set and type
```

*delimiter* or *prompt*. Operationally, one may think of undelimited
continuations as stacks and delimited continuations as segmented
stacks.

In their raw form delimited continuations do not readily fit into the
Wasm ecosystem, as the Wasm type system is not powerful enough to type
them. The gist of the problem is that the classic treatment of
delimited continuations provides only one universal control tag
(i.e. the mechanism which transforms a runtime stack into a
programmatic data object). In order to use Wasm's simple type system
to type delimited continuations, we use the idea of multiple *named*
control tags from Plotkin and Pretnar's effect handlers. Each control
tag is declared module-wide along its payload type and return
type. This declaration can be used to readily type points of non-local
transfer of control. From a operational perspective we may view
control tags as a means for writing an interface for the possible
kinds of non-local transfers (or stack switches) that a computation
may perform.

### Typed Continuation Primer

A *continuation* is a first-class program object that represents the
remainder of computation from a certain point in the execution of a

> program. The typed continuations proposal is based on a structured

Reviewer: ```suggestion
program -- intuitively, its current stack. The typed continuations proposal is based on a structured
```

notion of delimited continuations. A *delimited continuation* is a
continuation whose extent is delimited by some *control delimiter*,
meaning it represents the remainder of computation from a certain

> point up to (and possibly including) its control delimiter. An

Reviewer: ```suggestion
point up to (and possibly including) its control delimiter -- intuitively, a segment of the stack. An
```

alternative to delimited continuations is undelimited continuations
which represent the remainder of the *entire* program. Delimited
continuations are preferable as they are more modular and more
fine-grained in the sense that they provide a means for suspending
local execution contexts rather than the entire global execution
context. In particular, delimited continuations are more expressive,
as an undelimited continuation is merely a delimited continuation
whose control delimiter is placed at the start of the program.

The crucial feature of the typed continuations proposal that makes it
more structured than conventional delimited continuations is *control
tags*. A control tag is a typed symbolic entity that suspends the
current execution context and reifies it as a *continuation object*
(henceforth, just *continuation*) up to its control delimiter. The
type of a control tag communicates the type of its payload as well as
its expected return type, i.e. the type of data that must be supplied
to its associated continuation upon resumption. In other words,
control tags define an *interface* for constructing continuations. A

> second aspect of the design that aids modularity by separating

Reviewer: ```suggestion
control tags define an *interface* for constructing continuations.

A second aspect of the design that aids modularity by separating
```

concerns is that the construction of continuations is distinct from
*handling* of continuations. A continuation is handled at the
delimiter of a control tag rather than at the invocation site of the
control tag. Control tags are a mild extension of exception tags as in

> the exception-handling proposal. The key difference is that in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the exception handling proposal. The key difference is that in
```

> addition to a payload type, a control tag also declares a return type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
addition to a payload type, a control tag also declares a return type. Roughly, control tags can be thought of as resumable exceptions.
```

coroutines (C++/Go/Smalltalk), generators/iterators
(C#/F#/Haskell/JavaScript/Racket/Python), effect handlers (OCaml),
call/cc (Racket), and so forth. Currently, Wasm lacks support for
implementing such control flow abstractions efficiently, since Wasm
does not provide any primitives for manipulating segments of the
execution stack. One possible approach is to add special support for
each of the aforementioned control abstractions, though, what about
the next 700 control abstractions? Adding individual support is not a
sustainable strategy as it does not scale. Instead, the goal of this
proposal is to introduce a general structured mechanism, which enables
the aforementioned and the next 700 control abstractions to be
implemented efficiently. Specifically, the idea is to provide an
interface for structured manipulation of the execution stack via
*typed delimited continuations*.-->
<!-- TODO mention highly scalable concurrency a la Erlang as a use case -->

## Additional Requirements

 * **No GC dependency**: We intend every language to be able to use
   typed continuations to implement non-local flow abstractions
   irrespective of whether its memory is managed by a GC. Thus this

>    proposal must not depend on a full-blown GC, rather, reference

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   proposal must not depend on the presence of a full-blown GC as in the GC proposal, rather, reference
```

   counting or a similar technique must be sufficient in cases where
   some form of memory management is necessary.

 * **Debugging friendliness**: The addition of continuations must
   preserve compatibility with standard debugging formats such as
   DWARF, meaning it must be possible to obtain a sequential
   unobstructed stack trace in the presence of continuations.

 * **Exception handling compatibility**: [The exception handling
   proposal](https://github.com/WebAssembly/exception-handling) adds
   special support for one kind of non-local control flow abstraction,
   namely, exception handlers. Exceptions must continue to work in the
   presence of typed continuations and vice versa.

 * **Preserve Wasm invariants of legacy code**: The proposal must be
   backwards compatibile with existing Wasm code. In particular, this
   means that the presence of typed continuations should not break
   invariants of existing code, e.g. code that expects to be executed

>    once should not suddenly be executed twice.

Reviewer: Is that a requirement that can be fulfilled? Should this be rephrased to say that there must be a way to protect the invariants of existing code, but it's not necessarily automatic (in the same vein as synchronisation might be needed when adding threads and shared memory).

Reviewer 2: Yes!

Reviewer 2: (I meant "Yes!" to the second part - it should be rephrased - and probably "No!" to the first question.)

## Instruction Set

The proposal adds a new reference type for continuations.

```wat

>   (cont ([tp*] -> [tr*]))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  (cont $t)
```

```

A continuation type is indexed by a function type, where `tp1*`
describes the expected stack shape prior to resuming/starting the
continuation (the parameter types), and `tr*` describes the stack

> shape after the continuation has run to completion (the return types).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A continuation type is given in terms of a function type `$t`, whose parameters `tp*`
describes the expected stack shape prior to resuming/starting the
continuation, and whose return types `tr*` describes the stack
shape after the continuation has run to completion.

As a shorthand, we will often write the function type inline and write a continuation type as
```wat
  (cont [tp*] -> [tr*])
```
```

### Declaring Control Tags

A control tag is similar to an exception extended with a result

> type. Operationally, a control tag may be thought of as a *resumable*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
type (or list thereof). Operationally, a control tag may be thought of as a *resumable*
```

exception. A tag declaration provides the type signature of a control
tag.

```wat
  (tag $e (param tp*) (result tr*))
```

> The `$e` is the name of the control tag. The parameter types `tp*`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `$e` is the symbolic index of the control tag in the index space of tags. The parameter types `tp*`
```

describe the expected stack layout prior to invoking the tag, and the
result types `tr*` describe the stack layout following an invocation
of the operation. In this document we will sometimes write `$e : [tp*]
-> [tr*]` as shorthand for indicating that such a declaration is in
scope.

### Creating Continuations

The following instruction creates a continuation in *suspended state*
from a function.

```wat

>   cont.new $ct : [(ref $ft)] -> [(ref $ct)]
>   where:
>   - $ft = [t1*] -> [t2*]
>   - $ct = cont $ft

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  cont.new $ct : [(ref $ft)] -> [(ref $ct)]
  where:
  - $ft = func [t1*] -> [t2*]
  - $ct = cont $ft
```

```

> The instruction expects the top of the stack to contain a reference to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The instruction takes as operand a reference to
```

a function of type `[t1*] -> [t2*]`. The body of this function is a
computation that may perform non-local control flow.

### Invoking Continuations

There are two ways to invoke (or run) a continuation.

The first way to invoke a continuation resumes the continuation under
a *handler*, which handles subsequent control suspensions within the
continuation.

```wat

>   resume (tag $e $l)* : [tp* (ref $ct)] -> [tr*]
>   where:
>   - $ct = cont ([tp*] -> [tr*])

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  resume (tag $e $l)* : [tp* (ref $ct)] -> [tr*]
  where:
  - $ct = cont [tp*] -> [tr*]
```

```

The `resume` instruction is parameterised by a handler defined by a
collection of pairs of control tags and labels. Each pair maps a
control tag to a label pointing to its corresponding handler code. The
`resume` instruction consumes its continuation argument, meaning a
continuation may be resumed only once.

The second way to invoke a continuation is to raise an exception at
the control tag invocation site. This amounts to performing "an
abortive action" which causes the stack to be unwound.

```wat

>   resume_throw $exn : [tp* (ref $ct)])] -> [tr*]
>   where:
>   - $ct = cont ([ta*] -> [tr*])
>   - $exn : [tp*] -> []

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  resume_throw $exn : [tp* (ref $ct)])] -> [tr*]
  where:
  - $ct = cont [ta*] -> [tr*]
  - $exn : [tp*] -> []
```

raised at the control tag invocation site. As with `resume`, this
instruction also fully consumes its continuation
argument. Operationally, this instruction raises the exception `$exn`
with parameters of type `tp*` at the control tag invocation point in
the context of the supplied continuation. As an exception is being
raised (the continuation is not actually being supplied a value) the
parameter types for the continuation `ta*` are unconstrained.

### Suspending Continuations

A computation running inside a continuation can suspend itself by
invoking one of the declared control tags.

```wat
  suspend $e : [tp*] -> [tr*]
  where:
  - $e : [tp*] -> [tr*]
```

The instruction `suspend` invokes the control tag named `$e` with
arguments of types `tp*`. Operationally, the instruction transfers
control out of the continuation to the nearest enclosing handler for
`$e`. This behaviour is similar to how raising an exception transfers
control to the nearest exception handler that handles the
exception. The key difference is that the continuation at the
suspension point expects to be resumed later with arguments of types
`tr*`.

### Binding Continuations

> The domain of a continuation may be shrunk via `cont.bind`. This

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The parameter list of a continuation may be shrunk via `cont.bind`. This
```

instruction provides a way to partially apply a given
continuation. This facility turns out to be important in practice due
to the block and type structure of Wasm as in order to return a
continuation from a block, all branches within the block must agree on
the type of continuation. By using `cont.bind`, one can
programmatically ensure that the branches within a block each return a
continuation with compatible type (the [Examples](#examples) section
provides several example usages of `cont.bind`).

```wat

>   cont.bind $ct2 : [tp1* (ref $ct1)] -> [(ref $ct2)]
>   where:
>   $ct1 = cont ([tp1 tp2*] -> [tr*])
>   $ct2 = cont ([tp2*] -> [tr*])

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  cont.bind $ct2 : [tp1* (ref $ct1)] -> [(ref $ct2)]
  where:
  $ct1 = cont [tp1* tp2*] -> [tr*]
  $ct2 = cont [tp2*] -> [tr*]
```

```

The instruction `cont.bind` binds the arguments of type `tp1*` to a
continuation of type `$ct1`, yielding a modified continuation of type
`$ct2` which expects fewer arguments. This instruction also consumes
its continuation argument, and yields a new continuation that can be
supplied to either `resume`,`resume_throw`, or `cont.bind`.

### Trapping Continuations

> In order to ensure that control cannot be captured across language

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to allow ensuring that control cannot be captured across certain abstraction or language
```

boundaries, we provide an instruction for explicitly trapping attempts

> at reifying stacks across language boundaries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
at reifying stacks across a certain point.
```

```wat

>   barrier $label $bt instr* : [s*] -> [t*]
>   where:
>   - $bt = [s*] -> [t*]
>   - instr* : [s*] -> [t*]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  barrier $l bt instr* end : [t1*] -> [t2*]
  where:
  - bt = [t1*] -> [t2*]
  - instr* : [t1*] -> [t2*]
```
(Because a block type is not a type index but something else.)

```

> The `barrier` instruction is a block with label `$label`, block type
> `$bt = [t1*] -> [t2*]`, whose body is the instruction sequence given

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `barrier` instruction is a block with label `$l`, block type
`bt = [t1*] -> [t2*]`, whose body is the instruction sequence given
```

proposal. However, whereas the latter necessitates the allocation of a
new closure, as continuations are single-shot no allocation is
necessary: all allocation happens when the original continuation is
created by preallocating one slot for each continuation argument.

### Consuming Continuations

There are three different ways in which continuations are consumed
(`resume,resume_throw,cont.bind`). A continuation is resumed with a
particular handler with `resume`. A continuation is aborted with
`resume_throw`. A continuation is partially applied with `cont.bind`.

In order to ensure that continuations are one-shot, `resume`,
`resume_throw`, and `cont.bind` destructively modify the continuation
object such that any subsequent use of the same continuation object
will result in a trap.

## Examples

### Lightweight threads (static)

(The full code for this example is [here](examples/static-lwt.wast).)

Lightweight threads are one of the primary use-cases for typed
continuations. In their most basic *static* form we assume a fixed
collection of cooperative threads with a single tag that allows a
thread to signal that it is willing to yield.

```wasm
(module $lwt

>   (event $yield (export "yield"))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  (tag $yield (export "yield"))
```

)
(register "lwt")
```

The `$yield` tag takes no parameter and has no result. Having
declared it, we can now write some cooperative threads as functions.

```wasm
(module $example

>   (event $yield (import "lwt" "yield"))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  (tag $yield (import "lwt" "yield"))
```

  (func $log (import "spectest" "print_i32") (param i32))

  (func $thread1 (export "thread1")
    (call $log (i32.const 10))
    (suspend $yield)
    (call $log (i32.const 11))
    (suspend $yield)
    (call $log (i32.const 12))
  )

  (func $thread2 (export "thread2")
    (call $log (i32.const 20))
    (suspend $yield)
    (call $log (i32.const 21))
    (suspend $yield)
    (call $log (i32.const 22))
  )

  (func $thread3 (export "thread3")
    (call $log (i32.const 30))
    (suspend $yield)
    (call $log (i32.const 31))
    (suspend $yield)
    (call $log (i32.const 32))
  )
)
(register "example")
```

Our intention is to interleave the execution of `$thread1`,
`$thread2`, and `$thread3`, using `(suspend $yield)` to suspend
execution to a scheduler which will perform a context switch.

If we were to try to run any of these functions at the top-level then
they would trap as soon as they try to suspend with the `$yield$`
tag, because we have not yet specified how to handle it.

We now define a scheduler.

```wasm
(module $scheduler
  (type $func (func))
  (type $cont (cont $func))

>   (event $yield (import "lwt" "yield"))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  (tag $yield (import "lwt" "yield"))
```

  ;; queue interface
  (func $queue-empty (import "queue" "queue-empty") (result i32))
  (func $dequeue (import "queue" "dequeue") (result (ref null $cont)))
  (func $enqueue (import "queue" "enqueue") (param $k (ref $cont)))

  (func $run (export "run")
    (loop $l
      (if (call $queue-empty) (then (return)))
      (block $on_yield (result (ref $cont))

>         (resume (event $yield $on_yield)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        (resume (tag $yield $on_yield)
```

                (call $dequeue)
        )
        (br $l)  ;; thread terminated
      ) ;;   $on_yield (result (ref $cont))
      (call $enqueue)  ;; continuation of current thread
      (br $l)
    )
  )
)
(register "scheduler")
```

We assume a suitable interface to a queue of active threads
represented as continuations. The scheduler is a loop which repeatedly
runs the continuation (thread) at the head of the queue. It does so by
resuming the continuation with a handler for the `$yield` tag. The

> handler `(event $yield $on_yield)` specifies that the `$yield` tag

Reviewer: ```suggestion
handler `(tag $yield $on_yield)` specifies that the `$yield` tag
```

  (type $cont (cont $func))

  (func $scheduler (import "scheduler" "run"))
  (func $enqueue (import "queue" "enqueue") (param (ref $cont)))

  (func $log (import "spectest" "print_i32") (param i32))

  (func $thread1 (import "example" "thread1"))
  (func $thread2 (import "example" "thread2"))
  (func $thread3 (import "example" "thread3"))

  (elem declare func $thread1 $thread2 $thread3)

  (func (export "run")
    (call $enqueue (cont.new (type $cont) (ref.func $thread1)))
    (call $enqueue (cont.new (type $cont) (ref.func $thread2)))
    (call $enqueue (cont.new (type $cont) (ref.func $thread3)))

    (call $log (i32.const -1))
    (call $scheduler)
    (call $log (i32.const -2))
  )
)

(invoke "run")
```

The output is as follows.
```
-1 : i32
10 : i32
20 : i32
30 : i32
11 : i32
21 : i32
31 : i32
12 : i32
22 : i32
32 : i32
-2 : i32
```
The threads are interleaved as expected.

### Lightweight threads (dynamic)

(The full code for this example is [here](examples/lwt.wast).)

We can make our lightweight threads functionality considerably more
expressive by allowing new threads to be forked dynamically.

```wasm
(module $lwt
  (type $func (func))
  (type $cont (cont $func))

>   (event $yield (export "yield"))
>   (event $fork (export "fork") (param (ref $cont)))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  (tag $yield (export "yield"))
  (tag $fork (export "fork") (param (ref $cont)))
```

)
(register "lwt")
```

We declare a new `$fork` tag that takes a continuation as a
parameter and (like `$yield`) returns no result. Now we modify our
example to fork each of the three threads from a single main thread.

```wasm
(module $example
  (type $func (func))
  (type $cont (cont $func))

>   (event $yield (import "lwt" "yield"))
>   (event $fork (import "lwt" "fork") (param (ref $cont)))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  (tag $yield (import "lwt" "yield"))
  (tag $fork (import "lwt" "fork") (param (ref $cont)))
```

  (func $log (import "spectest" "print_i32") (param i32))

  (elem declare func $thread1 $thread2 $thread3)

  (func $main (export "main")
    (call $log (i32.const 0))
    (suspend $fork (cont.new (type $cont) (ref.func $thread1)))
    (call $log (i32.const 1))
    (suspend $fork (cont.new (type $cont) (ref.func $thread2)))
    (call $log (i32.const 2))
    (suspend $fork (cont.new (type $cont) (ref.func $thread3)))
    (call $log (i32.const 3))
  )

  (func $thread1
    (call $log (i32.const 10))
    (suspend $yield)
    (call $log (i32.const 11))
    (suspend $yield)
    (call $log (i32.const 12))
  )

  (func $thread2
    (call $log (i32.const 20))
    (suspend $yield)
    (call $log (i32.const 21))
    (suspend $yield)
    (call $log (i32.const 22))
  )

  (func $thread3
    (call $log (i32.const 30))
    (suspend $yield)
    (call $log (i32.const 31))
    (suspend $yield)
    (call $log (i32.const 32))
  )
)
(register "example")
```

As with the static example we define a scheduler module.
```wasm
(module $scheduler
  (type $func (func))
  (type $cont (cont $func))

>   (event $yield (import "lwt" "yield"))
>   (event $fork (import "lwt" "fork") (param (ref $cont)))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  (tag $yield (import "lwt" "yield"))
  (tag $fork (import "lwt" "fork") (param (ref $cont)))
```

  (func $queue-empty (import "queue" "queue-empty") (result i32))
  (func $dequeue (import "queue" "dequeue") (result (ref null $cont)))
  (func $enqueue (import "queue" "enqueue") (param $k (ref null $cont)))
  ...
)
(register "scheduler")
```

In this example we illustrate five different schedulers. First, we
write a baseline synchronous scheduler which simply runs the current
thread to completion without actually yielding.

```wasm
  (func $sync (export "sync") (param $nextk (ref null $cont))
    (loop $l
      (if (ref.is_null (local.get $nextk)) (then (return)))
      (block $on_yield (result (ref $cont))
        (block $on_fork (result (ref $cont) (ref $cont))

>           (resume (event $yield $on_yield)
>                   (event $fork $on_fork)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
          (resume (tag $yield $on_yield)
                  (tag $fork $on_fork)
```

thread) and the second is the continuation of the currently executing
thread.

Running the synchronous scheduler on the example produces the following output.
```
0 : i32
1 : i32
2 : i32
3 : i32
10 : i32
11 : i32
12 : i32
20 : i32
21 : i32
22 : i32
30 : i32
31 : i32
32 : i32
```
First the main thread runs to completion, then each of the forked
threads in sequence.

Following a similar pattern, we define four different asynchronous
schedulers.

```wasm
  ;; four asynchronous schedulers:
  ;;   * kt and tk don't yield on encountering a fork
  ;;     1) kt runs the continuation, queuing up the new thread for later
  ;;     2) tk runs the new thread first, queuing up the continuation for later
  ;;   * ykt and ytk do yield on encountering a fork
  ;;     3) ykt runs the continuation, queuing up the new thread for later
  ;;     4) ytk runs the new thread first, queuing up the continuation for later

  ;; no yield on fork, continuation first
  (func $kt (export "kt") (param $nextk (ref null $cont))
    (loop $l
      (if (ref.is_null (local.get $nextk)) (then (return)))
      (block $on_yield (result (ref $cont))
        (block $on_fork (result (ref $cont) (ref $cont))

>           (resume (event $yield $on_yield)
>                   (event $fork $on_fork)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
          (resume (tag $yield $on_yield)
                  (tag $fork $on_fork)
```

                  (local.get $nextk)
          )
          (local.set $nextk (call $dequeue))
          (br $l)  ;; thread terminated
        ) ;;   $on_fork (result (ref $cont) (ref $cont))
        (local.set $nextk)                      ;; current thread
        (call $enqueue) ;; new thread
        (br $l)
      )
      ;;     $on_yield (result (ref $cont))
      (call $enqueue)                    ;; current thread
      (local.set $nextk (call $dequeue)) ;; next thread
      (br $l)
    )
  )

  ;; no yield on fork, new thread first
  (func $tk (export "tk") (param $nextk (ref null $cont))
    (loop $l
      (if (ref.is_null (local.get $nextk)) (then (return)))
      (block $on_yield (result (ref $cont))
        (block $on_fork (result (ref $cont) (ref $cont))

>           (resume (event $yield $on_yield)
>                   (event $fork $on_fork)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
          (resume (tag $yield $on_yield)
                  (tag $fork $on_fork)
```

                  (local.get $nextk)
          )
          (local.set $nextk (call $dequeue))
          (br $l)  ;; thread terminated
        ) ;;   $on_fork (result (ref $cont) (ref $cont))
        (call $enqueue)                            ;; current thread
        (local.set $nextk) ;; new thread
        (br $l)
      )
      ;;     $on_yield (result (ref $cont))
      (call $enqueue)                    ;; current thread
      (local.set $nextk (call $dequeue)) ;; next thread
      (br $l)
    )
  )

  ;; yield on fork, continuation first
  (func $ykt (export "ykt") (param $nextk (ref null $cont))
    (loop $l
      (if (ref.is_null (local.get $nextk)) (then (return)))
      (block $on_yield (result (ref $cont))
        (block $on_fork (result (ref $cont) (ref $cont))

>           (resume (event $yield $on_yield)
>                   (event $fork $on_fork)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
          (resume (tag $yield $on_yield)
                  (tag $fork $on_fork)
```

                  (local.get $nextk)
          )
          (local.set $nextk (call $dequeue))
          (br $l)  ;; thread terminated
        ) ;;   $on_fork (result (ref $cont) (ref $cont))
        (call $enqueue)                         ;; current thread
        (call $enqueue) ;; new thread
        (local.set $nextk (call $dequeue))      ;; next thread
        (br $l)
      )
      ;;     $on_yield (result (ref $cont))
      (call $enqueue)                    ;; current thread
      (local.set $nextk (call $dequeue)) ;; next thread
      (br $l)
    )
  )

  ;; yield on fork, new thread first
  (func $ytk (export "ytk") (param $nextk (ref null $cont))
    (loop $l
      (if (ref.is_null (local.get $nextk)) (then (return)))
      (block $on_yield (result (ref $cont))
        (block $on_fork (result (ref $cont) (ref $cont))

>           (resume (event $yield $on_yield)
>                   (event $fork $on_fork)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
          (resume (tag $yield $on_yield)
                  (tag $fork $on_fork)
```

    (call $scheduler3 (cont.new (type $cont) (ref.func $main)))
    (call $log (i32.const -4))
    (call $scheduler4 (cont.new (type $cont) (ref.func $main)))
    (call $log (i32.const -5))
    (call $scheduler5 (cont.new (type $cont) (ref.func $main)))
    (call $log (i32.const -6))
  )
)

(invoke "run")
```

The output is as follows, demonstrating the various different scheduling behaviours.
```
-1 : i32
0 : i32
1 : i32
2 : i32
3 : i32
10 : i32
11 : i32
12 : i32
20 : i32
21 : i32
22 : i32
30 : i32
31 : i32
32 : i32
-2 : i32
0 : i32
1 : i32
2 : i32
3 : i32
10 : i32
20 : i32
30 : i32
11 : i32
21 : i32
31 : i32
12 : i32
22 : i32
32 : i32
-3 : i32
0 : i32
10 : i32
1 : i32
20 : i32
11 : i32
2 : i32
30 : i32
21 : i32
12 : i32
3 : i32
31 : i32
22 : i32
32 : i32
-4 : i32
0 : i32
1 : i32
10 : i32
2 : i32
20 : i32
11 : i32
3 : i32
30 : i32
21 : i32
12 : i32
31 : i32
22 : i32
32 : i32
-5 : i32
0 : i32
10 : i32
1 : i32
11 : i32
20 : i32
2 : i32
12 : i32
21 : i32
30 : i32
3 : i32
22 : i32
31 : i32
32 : i32
-6 : i32
```

### Actors (TODO)

### Async/await (TODO)

### Delimited continuations (TODO)

## Implementation Strategies

### Stack cut'n'paste (TODO)

### Segmented Stacks

> Segmented stacks is a state-of-the-art implementation technique for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Segmented stacks is an implementation technique for
```

 | ...                 |
 |                     |                 (active)
 |                     |       ----|---------------------|
 | $h1                 |<-----/    | ...                 |
 .                     .          >| suspend $e     |
 .                     .           .                     .
 .                     .           .                     .
                                   .                     .
```

The suspension reverses the parent-child link again, and leaves behind
a "hole" on stack 2, that can be filled by an invocation of
`resume`.

```ioke
      (stack 1)                         (stack 2)
       (suspended)
 |---------------------|
 |                     |
 | ...                 |
 |                     |                 (active)
 |                     |       --->|---------------------|
>| $h1                 |------/    | ...                 |
 .                     .           | [ ]                 |
 .                     .           .                     .
 .                     .           .                     .
                                   .                     .
```

## Design Considerations and Extensions

### Memory Management

> The current proposal does not require a cycle-detecting garbage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The current proposal does not require a general garbage
```

collector as the linearity of continuations guarantees that there are

> no cycles in continuation objects. In theory, we could do without any
> automated memory management at all if we took seriously the idea that
> failure to use a continuation constitutes a bug in the producer. In
> practice, we expect that for many systems the only feasible way to
> ensure that continuations are always used (or at least deallocated) is
> to use some form of automated memory management, such as a reference
> counting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
no cycles in continuation objects. To prevent space leaks from unconsumed
continuations, implementations will generally need some form of automated
memory management for them. Due to their acyclicity, a reference counting scheme is sufficient.
```

Reviewer 2: something I wanted to say has been deleted here... I'll try rewording this

  where:
  - $ht = handler tr*
  - $e : [ s* ] -> [ t* ]
```

If the handler is not currently active, e.g., because an outer handler
has been suspended, then this instruction would trap.

### Direct Switching

The current proposal uses the asymmetric suspend/resume pair of
primitives that is characteristic of effect handlers. It does not
include a symmetric way of switching to another continuation directly,
without going through a handler, and it is conceivable that the double
hop through a handler might involve unnecessary overhead for use cases
like lightweight threading.

Though there is currently no evidence that the double hop overhead is
significant in practice, if it does turn out to be important for some
applications then the current proposal can be extended with a more
symmetric `switch_to` primitive.

Given named handlers, it is possible to introduce a somewhat magic
instruction for switching directly to another continuation:

```wat
  switch_to : [ t1* (ref $ct1) (ref $ht) ] -> [ t2* ]
  where:
  - $ht = handler t3*
  - $ct1 = cont ([ (ref $ht) (ref $ct2$) t1* ] -> [ t3* ])
  - $ct2 = cont ([ t2* ] -> [ t3* ])
```

This behaves as if there was a built-in tag

```wat

>   (tag Switch (param t1* (ref $ct1)) (result t3*))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  (tag $Switch (param t1* (ref $ct1)) (result t3*))
```

```

with which the computation suspends to the handler, and the handler
implicitly handles this by resuming to the continuation argument,
thereby effectively switching to it in one step. Like `suspend_to`,
this would trap if the handler was not currently active.

The fact that the handler implicitly resumes, passing itself as a
handler to the target continuation, makes this construct behave like a
deep handler, which is slightly at odds with the rest of the proposal.

In addition to the handler, `switch_to` also passes the new
continuation to the target, which allows the target to switch back to
it in a symmetric fashion. Notably, in such a use case, `$ct1` and
`$ct2` would be the same type (and hence recursive).

In fact, symmetric switching need not necessarily be tied to named
handlers, since there could also be an indirect version with dynamic
handler lookup:

```wat
  switch : [ t1* (ref $ct1) ] -> [ t2* ]
  where:
  - $ct1 = cont ([ (ref $ct2) t1* ] -> [ t3* ])
  - $ct2 = cont ([ t2* ] -> [ t3* ])
```

It seems undesirable that every handler implicitly handles the

> built-in `Switch` tag, so this should be opt-in by a mode flag on the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
built-in `$Switch` tag, so this should be opt-in by a mode flag on the
```

Consider a module A written using an existing C/C++ compiler that
targets a Wasm backend. Let us assume that module A depends on a
second Wasm module B. Now suppose that the producer for module B is
updated to take advantage of typed continuations. In order to ensure
that suspensions arising in calls to B do not pass through A,
potentially causing unexpected changes to the semantics of A, the
producer for module A can ensure that all external calls are wrapped
in the barrier instruction.

It might seem preferable to somehow guarantee that support for typed
continuations is not enabled by default, meaning that no changes to
the producer for module A would be necessary. But it is unclear what
such an approach would look like in practice and whether it would
actually be feasible. In any case, using the barrier instruction the
producer for B could make module B safe for linking with an unchanged
module A by wrapping the barrier instruction around all of the
functions exported by module B.

Questions of Wasm interoperability and support for legacy code are
largely orthogonal to the typed continuations proposal and similar
issues already arise with extensions such as exceptions.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

TODO: resuspend (aka OCaml's reperform, and analogous to exception proposal's rethrow)
```
